Add blog post for Release 10.9.0 (#949)
jellyfin/jellyfin.org: blog/2024/05-05-jellyfin-release-10.9.0/index.mdx

* DLNA support is now provided by a plugin and has been removed from the core server. This has several major benefits: first, it can be updated independently of the server to some degree; second, it will not be enabled for anyone unless they want it and explicitly install the plugin; and third, it reduces the potential of security holes around DLNA due to both previous benefits. If you wish to use (or continue to use) DLNA, please install the plugin after upgrading.

* We now support AVIF and WEBP images for Pictures libraries.

* Tags are now accounted for during searches, allowing one to search by tag.

* We now support multiple simultaneous subtitle tracks (maximum of two, a primary and secondary) in the web player.

* We've revamped the administrative dashboard UI to help improve usability and ease of finding options.

### API & Security

* All API endpoints now return proper return codes, ensuring that API endpoint results can be reliably interpreted without additional parsing.

> * Our API versioning scheme is now based off of the "last unstable build before a release" and uses a date-based version going forward, to help make it a bit clearer and assist in automating the circular dependencies in our API specifications.

Reviewer: Actually not true, the generated specifications still refer only the Jellyfin server version. For unstable builds that is the version for the next JF release (so "10.9.0 right now).

See https://api.jellyfin.org/openapi/jellyfin-openapi-unstable.json (info.version)

Author: How should I word it?

Reviewer: I guess just remove it

Author: Done.

* Parental ratings are significantly improved, with better enforcement, inheritable ratings, and more.

* LiveTV and Collection permissions are now discrete and configurable per-user.

* The EasyPassword (PIN) feature has been removed as this was a big security risk especially for administrator accounts; QuickConnect login is still supported however.

* User permission handling has been unified and numerous bugs fixed, ensuring a more secure server from untrusted users.

### Core Server & Networking

> * The underlying .NET framework has been upgraded to version 8, the latest major and LTS release. This brings us many under-the-hood improvements and changes to help with our ongoing effort to streamline the codebase and improve overall performance.

Reviewer: ".NET framework" is the name for the windows-only version. We just use .NET.

```suggestion
* The .NET version has been upgraded to version 8, the latest major and LTS release. This brings us many under-the-hood improvements and changes to help with our ongoing effort to streamline the codebase and improve overall performance.
```

* Several audio improvements: support for Opus, FLAC, and ALAC codecs in the HLS engine; improved support and handling for transcoding DTS and TrueHD audio streams; new codec enforcement; better bitrate calculations; new audio normalization features; and stereo downmixing algorithm selection.

* FFmpeg segments can now be automatically deleted after the client requests them, significantly reducing the space requirements of the transcoding temporary directory. This optional feature is disabled by default and can be enabled in the transcoding settings.

* Support for direct stream playback of DVD and BluRay data folders, preferred over ISOs.

* Support for AV1 hardware and software encoding.

* Support for RK3588 hardware acceleration via MPP.

* Support for Vulkan-based tonemapping with AMD VA-API.

* Support for complete hardware acceleration on Apple systems (both Apple Silicon and Intel; previously was partial).

* Support for Dolby Vision playback remuxing.

### Scanning, Library & Playlist Management

> * Support for scanning and displaying lyrics.

Reviewer: Note: more advanced lyric management is planned for 10.10

(technically API already supports it, there is an open PR for web to implement search & management)

Author: This one I did reword.

* Season names are now parsed from NFO files.

* The MusicBrainz interface has been improved to better handle music libraries.

* Support for hearing-impaired subtitles (sdh/hi./cc).

> * Support for playlist ACLs with playlist sharing between users and enforcement of playlist ownership. Existing playlists will become owner-only, and playlist permissions can be set when made global/shared. Playlists from library files will be global.

Reviewer: Note: not merged yet for web, if we don't get it in time we should remove it from the changelog (changelog should only mention stuff available in the reference client)

Author: Do we still think it'll land? If not we can just remove it.

Reviewer: Bill says he is working on it, so it might still land. That's why I left it as a note.

Author: (context) We're 2/3 PRs in, the last one should land soon for all this to work so it will get in. We were basically forced to or we'd completely break playlists with the API change, so.

Reviewer 2: We still won't have a UI for setting the user level permissions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The visibility of playlists can now be made private
  * User playlists are now private by default
  * We're working on playlist sharing for a future release
```

Reviewer 2: "playlist sharing" is fine I think... you just can't set permissions for individual users... and you can only set a playlist as public/private when it is created

so you can mark a new playlist as public and any user can view it but not edit it since that is a user level perm

* Invalid items will be automatically removed from playlists.

> ### Clients
> 
> * Major fixes for Chromecast, including better support for a self-hosted cast receiver, better local network detection, and connectivity improvements. **We need Chromecast client developers badly - if you are interested please reach out.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Casting

* Better local network detection
* Connectivity improvements
* Ability to self-host cast receiver

We're looking for contributors for our [cast receiver](https://github.com/jellyfin/jellyfin-chromecast/). This is the application that loads on a TV when using the "Google Cast" feature. Please reach out if you're interested.
```

Enlarging this section a bit with a bigger call-out to make it more visible.

## The Next Version

> With our CI improvements outlined previously, we're quite confident that this will be our last "very long" release cycle. Our plan is for the next major version (10.10.0) to be released at most 6 months from now, some time in October. We hope this increased cadence will help alleviate the problems with large releases such as a very long time-to-stable for new features, translations, etc. and help lower the number of major bugs at each major release, streamlining the upgrade process. But this needs everyone's help. Back in October 2023, we made a call for developers, and we've gotten a lot of interest, but this is not a one-and-done event. We need contibutions now more than ever, especially around the web frontend to help implement our planned design changes. If this interests you, please reach out and we can help get you set up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With our continuous integrations improvements outlined previously, we're quite confident that this will be our last "very long" release cycle. Our plan is for the next major version (10.10.0) to be released at most 6 months from now, some time in October. We hope this increased cadence will help alleviate the problems with large releases such as a very long time-to-stable for new features, translations, etc. and help lower the number of major bugs at each major release, streamlining the upgrade process. But this needs everyone's help. Back in October 2023, we made a call for developers, and we've gotten a lot of interest, but this is not a one-and-done event. We need contributions now more than ever, especially around the web frontend to help implement our planned design changes. If this interests you, please reach out and we can help get you set up.
```
